hey guys we are recording in Belgium and
this is where I've crossed paths with a
longtime viewer of my channel known
known to my supporters on patreon as
Muhammad Socrates so Muhammad has asked
a number of the most interesting
questions that sparked some of the most
interesting and longest videos on my
channel
I recently I think we did like a 1-hour
answer to your questions this this sort
of thing has gone from time to time he's
a guy who has a lot of interest in
history politics and philosophy although
actually your formal area of education
is is biochemistry right biology and
chemistry and the last couple of days we
met face to face the first time we've
had many interesting conversations and
we've now visited two museum's together
so he got subjected to several hours of
constant lecturing on arts history and
politics at first the art museum and
today the Museum of War history it's
been a lot of fun so oh it's so another
thing to mention he's in many ways wise
beyond his years and he speaks several
languages diverse experience in
different countries around the world but
in fact I was shocked when it came up
that he is only 21 yeah yeah so you
started watching my channel when you
were 18 years old I think something like
19 so it is it is no surprising for me
to think that this is somebody who has
in some ways been in dialogue with you
know since he was 18 or 19 years old
to some extent my monologue is about
politics of you know they've been above
politics and probably also religion and
philosophy yeah have been a contrasting
view in your life that you've yeah
[Music]
concept of scrutiny in politics but I
think this is an example my personal
life yeah the presence of your videos in
my life are like do represent the roast
cook me right yeah there's an 11 healthy
can change
someone's perspectives a lot and
positively there yeah I didn't I didn't
expect that I could find a vegan who
also is very philosophically
sophisticated and very politically
active like most of the vegans on
YouTube were basically just yes the
scientific and like health side of the
debate and all the other perspectives
and splace got basically no attention at
all
initially they they philosophical side
and I actually got introduced to you
through the drama
what made you actually famous like you
stayed with the channel you may have
noticed it because the trauma but you
kept watching because you were actually
interested though yes immediately like
to click on the playlists and videos on
the channel and like chicken topics and
I immediately got interested this guy is
different than the other look because I
was really like disappointed in right
the other channel sure bit like I would
basically just wasn't watching beaten
gains for the for this film and and
comedy right basically I wasn't hoping
to get anything useful or interesting or
new from it well I know obviously I feel
the same way about vegan YouTube people
often ask me what channels do i watch
and sometimes my answer is nothing or
there's a one channel I'm watching their
very very few than it was me but the
other thing I can imagine is how
different my own life would be if when I
was your age when I was 19 to 21 if
there was someone like me that I was
watching on YouTube if there was someone
even if I disagreed with them about many
issues to stimulate that I was saying to
Melissa Melissa sear off camera by the
way um I've seen him once a couple days
ago that you know one of my problems
growing up was that I was not stupid
enough to idolize noam chomsky you know
Noam Chomsky you know like there were
figures like that in the media in the in
the newspapers and so on and I know for
a lot of people know
he was that challenging you know
political figure but to me he was a joke
I just I I just basically found him
stupid or yeah too stupid to take
seriously almost I've also was not
stupid enough to ie to idolize you know
the president United States I mean
George Wow Wow would you look up to
church well you know reading reading the
autobiography of George W Bush changed
my life I've never heard anyone say that
but yeah that was uh that was part of my
own you know crisis it was I'm not
having anyone to look up to and you know
now at least recently have been a lot of
videos about it um when I was no longer
stupid whoa you know what I I lost faith
in the family religion that I was really
many ways raised to be a communist and
rejected communism rejected that
rejected Marxism to which is a separate
stage there was first projecting
communism projecting Marxism you know
and then you look around and really
there was nothing nothing to replace it
with there was nothing positive I could
relate to so you know a fight if I
hadn't discovered someone like me at
that time even if I had rejected me you
know that that was action would have
been a really interesting you know
process to go through it would have been
something to something to respond to
yeah yeah appreciate like the influence
it's not a very superficial difference
you made although it was very gradual
and through like over three years
yeah right yeah I didn't even feel the
the big transitions are I've gone
through so it was past three years but
it was certainly profound like that yeah
the change it's not necessarily that I
just adopted or abused but it's right
now stimulated my yeah my skeptical
faculties like yeah I questioned a lot
of push top positions of making like
earlier and I changed my whole outlook
on veganism
like before it was actually basically
just
oh really it was okay healthy living
yeah but oh and it happens that this
scientific evidence pointed to where is
amore it's nice
we've been talking for two days but I
wouldn't have guessed that about you
because you care so much about politics
generally I would have thought okay but
that's interesting yeah I wasn't aware
of it any other aspects of veganism like
especially inside of it I know that okay
vegans do omit refused amounts of co2
and those are the facts like they were
like I think I think I read about it
like after after I went vegan
maybe after Rio so but it wasn't really
the motivating factor
well initially even later like I lost
interest in like the stringent healthy
health arguments like and I began to
look for something to keep me yeah maybe
long term and and basically your chair
was the answer my goal kind of came yeah
well just miss something you said there
briefly in the first year no even the
first two years of my channel when I
tried to talk to other vegans on YouTube
they you know by email normally for but
then later by sky person the first thing
they always say to me was I don't agree
with all of the views in your channel
but and and I started seeing them and I
got Pratley on maybe the first time I
didn't say this is the first couple
times this happened so often I remember
saying to people would you really want
to watch a channel or you just were you
agree with everything the person says
like you know boring why no go so I
talked about some challenging I choked
with some challenging stuff like you
know I'm not saying this to insult you
or anyone but if someone came to my
channel I made a video recently about
politics in Cambodia
why would you agree with me like most of
my viewers you probably never even
thought about this you don't have any
opinion about you know current politics
in Cambodia so you know it's challenging
to you no matter what
you know but if you go to my channel you
really think I thought I thought
democracy in Cambodia was doing just
fine and here you are saying it's it's a
disaster you know so so many of the
things I was making videos about of
course they're challenging of course
they're unexpected but yeah I remember
that but I sorry just gonna say I think
what that reflected was the mentality at
the time so maybe 2015 2016 that to be a
viewer of a channel meant that you were
a cult follower you don't like
durianrider like this kind of thing and
no that's not what my channel is about
you know okay disagree with me let's you
know maybe these things are worth
disagreeing about I don't I don't want
to disagree about trivial crap I'm
really not into that but you know a lot
of a lot of things that worth disagree
but okay cool so look I have no idea
what the questions are but you say you
had some question that I wanted to ask
you something cap this is the gaff okay
you always talk about how we don't need
belief mmm to be a vegan and to
recognize the moral significance of the
vegan message and you always talk but I
couldn't swallow this but like how could
you even make moral judgments and
evaluations without having some kind of
presuppositions or belief about what
good and bad is right it's not like
drawing like painting a painting right
right right right sheet of paper right I
thought the analogy kind of misleading
or uncomplete right so okay in terms of
the European tradition one of the marks
of the Enlightenment so this is meaning
the Enlightenment as a period of history
by the way here we've got the history of
France in Chinese is holding up the
microphone at the moment and it does it
goes over the history of the
Enlightenment and in France in Chinese
um one thing one of the big ideas in the
period of the Enlightenment including in
authors like jean-jacques Rousseau was a
lot of optimism about reason with the
capital or reason and a rash
right and during my lifetime instead
there was a lot of cynicism a lot of
lowered expectations about reason and
rationality it saved the 1990s or maybe
a major or a period of this you know in
philosophy and in pop culture but the I
would say my views are based on a very
limited optimism about reason so just
maybe we've in the last two days we've
talked about many really hopeless
political situations Saudi Arabia
Afghanistan you know I don't know sir we
have talked about some political
conflicts around the world that is not
easy to be optimistic about right there
are a lot of social problems like water
pollution and air pollution and people
eating meat and wearing leather shoes
I'm wearing fur coats where it's it's
it's hard to be optimistic um but in his
particular scenario like when I say to
someone who drinks cow milk you know
normal meat eating the type of person
when I say to someone if you see a cow
in a farmer's field would you be willing
to get down on your hands and knees and
shuffle over to the cow and drink the
milk out of the cow's udder right well
what am i appealing to you so this is my
this is my conviction this is my
conclusion I don't think I'm appealing
to their belief you know I don't think
I'm appealing to their faith I think I
am appealing to their sense of the
absurd right and they arrive at this
sense of the absurd
through a very limited use of reason
right yes sir just another example real
quick Melissa knows this so the day
before yesterday or maybe yesterday this
but we haven't been sleeping much uh-huh
jetlag and you know right through but
when we were at the airport this is at
London Airport the the sick the woman
who was the head of security she had
tended me a little tiny bit and you know
my position was in talking to her I said
at one point I don't have to answer your
question either I have civil rights
there you know I said either you have
civil rights you don't either person you
know it's it's a question of civil
rights you know so now again what am I
appealing to in this and it was
Melissa doctor who's a slightly surreal
negotiation where there's nothing to
negotiate I'm you know I'm there to get
searched as a No go ahead and search me
I'm happy to be searched that's really
all I have to say but no no it's just
saying but the question is do this um
you know ultimately I'm not appealing to
her goodness of heart
I'm not appealing to her charity of
spirit I am trying to appeal to her
sense of the observed to reason in this
this limited sense you know what what
are you asking me you're gonna search me
you let's get on with the search like
this nothing so again sorry but it's a
funny situation in our in our in our own
lives um yeah you know sorry and again
in that in that same conflict she was
she this woman complained I think for no
good reason I think you agree with that
she complained that I had somehow
disrespected or insulted her and I
didn't respond I pointed those two most
importance this I didn't respond by
saying no I never insulted you that
would have escalated the conflict I
respond with a question I said have I
said one word that was it's only to you
you know and this this managed to bring
it down so let me just this is a
ridiculous but this is a real-world
situation some of us with police or with
the authorities are in this situation
what what am i appealing to and what is
my conduct chill on my part I own have
faith in humanity I don't have faith in
the Constitution or in some political
thing
I'm there's this really base level of
human reason and a sense of what's
what's observed like are you gonna
interrogate me for complying with being
screwed what are we doing here what is
the question about I'm taking off my
clothes I'm happy to do the search what
what do you want to know what do you
wanna ask me you know no you sorry this
is not a this is not a philosophical
situation but for me honestly it does
reflecting on it talk about it
afterwards there is a little bit of a
philosophical dev now you know some what
are the limits to this sorry so I mean
you're asking about
so is your question can we challenge
evil without faith or can we do good
with our faith I mean these are all kind
of income
within your within your question right I
mean you know so you wanna speak to that
point of my question like this can you
make any moral judgments without having
some ah okay yes like it's the sense of
the observed like a reliable source of
moral tournaments and moral right where
in my my answer is a word basis to a
limited extent yes but okay you do want
to show me your criticism okay
right right right so I got this I got
this question about epistemology couple
months ago and answered it on discord on
a live broadcast that wasn't recorded
and you know um one of the the first
part of the answer was asked this about
epistemology so epistemology without
belief or thought how do we know
anything and that pointed out look when
we're not in an academic classroom when
we're not in a university lecture hall
with a chalkboard
we are almost never asking the question
how do I know this Apple is red I don't
have an apple here how do I know this
representation of a raspberry and a
strawberry is red you know this kind of
question this is an academic question
that we asked in the classroom you know
but I mean sorry obviously this extends
a good and evil also you know questions
of moral judgment we're almost never
dealing with a very abstract question
like this and sorry I just put you both
in the university classroom and into
practical sciences this can be answered
in a very technical sense like when we
you know use a mass spectrometer or pass
a ray of light over this and measure the
wavelength of the light at what point
does does it stop being orange mr. P but
there is a kind of technical the science
of optics or whatever there could be
this is not what people are really
asking they don't want to tell you all
answer the one that wants philosophical
answer and it may not be susceptible to
a feel so we've done this on this level
of no specificity most of what we're
dealing with in the real world like
being interrogated by the authorities
were normally dealing with
contrasting values of this of this kind
you know sorry I look earlier today you
were asking me questions about about
practical real world democratic reform
sorry the actual phrasing the question
you said but do you really think that
modern mixed economies like Denmark or
those in Denmark Sweden and I forget the
other example but there was no yeah
maybe there's some successful some
accessible economies and democratic
societies like this in Western Europe
you said do you really think that the
ideal other countries should should
aspire to imitate and I said no it's not
that I think that they're the ideal but
I think there's something that
pragmatically many countries you could
you could benefit from you could learn
lessons from within the next 10 20 years
there's something private but this isn't
about knowing what's ideal
it's about contrasting real-world
examples in real situations so on a
course level like this example of would
you get on your hands and knees and
drink the milk out of a cow's udder I do
think this completely non belief based
mode of reasoning that that it does work
right and again in terms of a perception
of color
can I just perceive that this is an
apple can I just perceive that this is
red which is almost never what people
really want to talk about in
epistemology you may have to in academic
epistle if there's normally more
meaningful questions how do we know
what's beautiful how do we know what's
divine there's some other question
people really want to get at not the
shade of red a nap or how can we tell
that that an apple is an apple um but I
mean the judge the nature of the
judgments were were making in the real
world often is like I'm being
interrogated and the woman interrogating
me says I disrespected her and I have to
ask did I say one word the district am i
you I mean what's what's happening here
this is this is the kind of thing we
have to negotiate and not um you know
against a blank canvas or against a
blank chalkboard putting a circle around
what's what's good and what's what's
evil so on a coarse and crude level
which is where most of the important
political and even ecological questions
lie I do think we can do this the faith
so we know how to give an example
a boy I went to high school with whose
name a university professor Oh myself ha
he he had a serious learning disability
but he nevertheless was your wrist
professor come I wonder how he copes now
with that he had something like dyslexia
it wasn't it wasn't the same as dyslexia
oh he broke into the science lab at the
high school and they stole all of the
thermometers and a number of other
expensive instruments and they sat on
the sidewalk smashing the thermometers
and stealing the mercury so they could
have mercury to fluent and of course
broken glass and mercury went into the
store train and I was not there I was
not a part of this I talked about it
more than a year after it it happened
have treated this if I were asking him
seriously trying to have a Socratic
dialogue did he or did he not consider
this evil there are several types of
evil to question here there the the
literal the downstream consequences the
water pollution the ecological pollution
there's the fact that you're damaging
the school in the classroom the ability
to provide education to people you know
like you know what school is losing its
scientific equipment to its their
monitor staff here there's different
there's different kinds of damage
volunteer neo sorry I mean I'm you know
I'm joking about it these are these are
the real world questions of good and
evil you know another one I talked about
you know sir again this is this is so
this was when I was in high school you
know there was a girl and I knew I
believed I knew for a fact that she was
raped and her older sister were raped
repeatedly by their father that they
were they were you know he did have been
a regular rapist that was on children
that he was otherwise generally a
pedophile now you know and so from my
perspective I knew this as a fact now
would it be oh sorry and this is the
this is the real clincher maybe you
don't know this what you didn't see us a
long time ago I made a video talking
with us um he was a judge at a very high
level in the court system now actually
someone who really wants to docs me or
something could actually take the
information here
around who I'm talking about but it was
suppressed the journalists who tried to
cover the story most of the coverage of
it was suppressed
I believe that Frank magazine somehow
covered it or mentioned it that was a
rebellious political publication in
Canada but the mainstream newspapers and
so on I was told they tried to publish
on it and it was was censored because he
was so high place in the system now now
what is the good or evil thing to do if
you are a young man who grew up reading
Batman comics and you know I had to
really think that through and I decided
then that violence was not the answer
and I'm still living by that today and
that was a real-world situation of
trying to figure out what's good and
evil or what's even acceptable but
intolerable you know not what's ideal
not what's perfect and these are these
are real-world situations so on that on
that course level method course you know
is a good word for it I think yeah you
can without faith you don't know there's
nothing no are there some moral
distinctions that are so fine so
particular and and for that reason I
think so aesthetic in their their nature
that it's more like asking when does
read become orange when does read become
pink you know is there some some ethical
distinction like this I'm open to that
possibility but I don't think it will
matter very much in in politics or even
in your real personal if I'm open to the
possibility there are some aesthetic
judgments because that's how you phrased
it was about surgery there's some
ethical judgments that in effect are so
refined they become aesthetic and that
then you get into these more more
particular questions you know okay it is
it okay to divorce my wife and then
marry her younger sister in some
cultures that's really considered a
terrible crime a medicine consider a
kind of unforgivable sin and you can see
why I mean it's gross I mean it's creepy
look you know so what you were cheating
on your wife with her younger sisters I
guess you could see why but on the other
hand I mean probably today and
for Nia for most english-speaking people
this they probably don't see that they
don't see that it's incest which it was
in Shakespeare's time it's the place of
Shakespeare you know - for a woman to
leave her husband for her husband's
brother that was that was incest as a
punishable crime and so on um you know
are we now into a realm of you know
questions of family duty and honor and
we're really getting into a more
culturally relative aesthetic sort of
judgment mmm
where where you can't like you can't ask
in the same simple way like you know so
I asked before would you get down on
your hands and knees and drink the milk
out of a cow's udder would you dump
mercury into the into the rain sewers
and Toronto would you smash up a bunch
of scientific instruments these are
questions but think that this is on a
pretty-pretty course course level um you
know what I don't know you know would
you accept it if a man divorced one of
your sisters to get married to your
younger sister you know you know so
again maybe this way but it doesn't have
this it doesn't have this simple sense
of this limited rational reason just
reveals how absurd it is you know
immediately I would guess you know
because I look I mean I I have two
sisters I got I don't know you could
probably imagine a situation they can't
huh you know Greg he's not that bad a
guy I don't know didn't work out for
Greg and Mary he can try it with Sue you
know maybe you don't care maybe what
it's your own sister or maybe even if as
an abstract principle you'd object to it
when you'd actually be in that situation
so yeah maybe there are some some as
some ethical distinction some ethical
judgment yeah but I think I think those
will always be the less less important
so another did you see my video with mod
vegan I did a three-hour debate on
ethics of of cocaine use No
a little bit too long I don't blame you
I don't blame you
right sir but just on a course level of
judgment when I asked her or I could ask
you look would you allow your own
daughter to use cocaine is that okay
from your perspective and in reality
everyone won't answer no even if you
yourself have been a cocaine addict in
the past or a cocaine user you do not
want your daughter to become or son if
you have a son whatever you know so this
is a veil this is at the same level of
absurdity rational absurdity that's just
revealed by it by reason I think and
then the next question is okay given
that you don't want your own daughter to
become a cooking or your own sister or
your own mother how do you justify
making cocaine legal and available and
someone what we know how does this
translate into into drug policy no I'm
not saying it's that simple to then
arrive at a good legal policy a specific
framework for you know what is the the
government's policy on drug abolition or
public achieve but but on the course
level of ethical judgment I think that
is an example again where it's yeah I
don't need to believe in anything I
don't need any kind of faith you know to
to proceed on that business but here's
the problem with this
[Music]
sure the sense of the observed like can
you really can you let me say that it's
the same with everyone like maybe I
don't find some things observe that
others find such and maybe maybe what's
motivating me the sense of disgust me
before yes no not the sensible yes great
for example I agree i think i think
disgust is a factor at all yes okay how
would you generalize such a moral right
can you even can use in the : a
philosophy like it doesn't really have
much of a well I think it's almost an
anti philosophy I think you know
nihilism is in some ways an anti
philosophy and since some ways a
positive and constructive philosophy um
okay
principles ok grows like good is it
so I can answer both questions so I'm on
a nihilist I believe every society is
structured that way in reality because
in reality people in power make these
decisions on the basis of animus and
their values are not universal
that's exactly why we have constant
political controversy so until quite
recently so you know in Japan up to a
certain point child pornography was
legal was permissible in Japan and then
they had a period of history where
photographed child pornography was
illegal but not cartoons and drawings
and then finally they made that illegal
I forget if it was last year but there
were newspaper stories about it Japan
finally makes Charlie Murphy illegal now
to my knowledge I think every other
country in the world
it's either illegal or the country is in
such a state of chaos that they don't
have any laws at all like there are a
few countries where there's just no no
regional law is working at the moment
Laos was like that for a long time but
you know sorry but it's not like people
intentionally made it legal but Japan
was gonna do this this was legal
permitted now you might think that was
an example that's so revolting that
sorry you mentioned discussed I think
disgust is an element where you say look
this is immoral and disgusting and
everyone else is revolted by so why
aren't you well not everyone's revolted
and that's exactly why there's not just
controversy but coercion so at any given
time there's a minority of people and
power in any of these countries we're
going to talk about so any real world
country in the the current century and
they make decisions that may be wildly
incompatible with the the majority of
people so no I mean other ethical
systems make claims to universal values
so Immanuel Kant is one of the most
observed about this but in generally the
specific part of the Western tradition
and you know monotheistic traditions and
so on
they say this is you know x y&z are
universal and everybody agrees with it
therefore therefore therefore and we all
know in reality the exact opposite is
true
so I mean supposing I were to say to you
the belief in human rights is universal
x y&z it's yet
jeans even some united nations of this
the belief in these this list of human
rights is universal and inviolable and
indestructible and made out of steel we
all know the exact opposite is true this
list of human rights is a type of myth
it's a type of Mythology it's a type of
fable and it's paper thin and it's week
and timorous and we want everyone to
pretend it's universal and available and
in fact almost nobody believes in it
even the average police officer doesn't
believe in it and the average police
officer doesn't in any way conduct and
live his life as if he believes in this
list of human rights or as if he cares
about them in any way
mrs. maybe horrifying the goal but it's
really true police officers don't the
vast majority of them don't live their
lives way that's why you don't just need
police officers but you need video
cameras and police officers and
investigators looking for corruption
within the police force and so on
none of these values are universal the
the the I mean for this way
communists believe that their ideals are
a future utopia nihilists assume that
our lack of ideals are the reality here
and now beneath the veneer of ideology
so this is a different view of society
where look all views have analytical and
explanatory power that none of these
values are universal that you can't
arrive at universal claims and then at
any given time so for one generation in
Japan politicians made excuses for child
pornography and then a different
generation of leaders took over and they
felt differently about it and so on and
this is how it is I mean you know
whether you talk about gay rights or
kind of any any it's not universal you
know you can stand up and make a speech
that gay rights are universal human
rights not in Saudi Arabia and not even
50 years ago in Canada not 50 years ago
Canada so there's nothing Universal
about it but sure it's a convenient
fable to try to tell people yeah so I
just said I don't see that as
problematic the lack of what's what's
universal but and no end look sorry I
had a debate recently with a guy from
India I'm sure he was Hindu I was just
cuz I wasn't sure if he was was Hindu or
Muslim but no one came up he was Hindu
so
a Hindu guy from India and I said to
have not quite the same example of Oh
cow milk so he's Hindu women you know
cows have a special significance in
general for most Hindus and I said to
him look do you really see nothing wrong
if you visit a factory farm and you see
a cow standing upright in a steel cage
on a concrete floor underneath the steel
roof in a shed and that cow is gonna
leave its whole life standing up and
sitting down on that one spot until one
day someone comes and so it's his neck
you don't see anything wrong with this
you don't see anything observed with it
and he dogmatically existed no I see he
said he saw nothing wrong with that he
thinks it's totally morally good and
proper to raise cows this way for their
whole lives to basically be nothing but
suffering ending in this meaningless
death to produce an economic value that
destroys human health and destroys the
environment that's all these are the bad
things that was his position on that now
so I can't claim it's a universal
conclusion to look at the reality of
factory farming and say hey there's
something wrong here
there's something irrational or
revolting you know a sense of disgust or
absurdity this is observed to have
millions of cows standing in millions of
sheds like this right that's not
universal but a large percentage of
people respond to it that way I mean I'd
say the same book child pornography a
large percentage of people respond to it
this way and I think we can organize an
effective movement for social change
over that learners people but so you
just so critically to give an example
where I'm really in the minority
I see gambling as really wrong you know
I really see gambling as immoral you
know didn't mean to like Las Vegas style
gambling the people pay money into a
machine or they pay for credit I see
that as as bad in a word that's not
obvious there there were millions of
people who see that as completely
morally positive or good or harmless
right so it's but obviously I've met
other people who share my values who
also just look at that same thing and
for them it's as obvious as drinking me
all kind of a cow's
that there is that kind of technology so
I don't I don't claim any of these are
universal but I would claim that if even
10% of people feel the way I feel about
cow milk and factory farming that 10% of
people could make a huge impact sure and
I think in reality we know it's it's
more than 10% it stems from the
realization that 90% of people never
like will never be vegan like it
veganism will always be a mineral a
phenomenon and right and you basically
admit that it's always gonna be like
that and from from this presupposition
you say okay how right and I develop the
most effective right a form of
convincing argumentation that appeals to
this minority or right right and you
know gay people will always be the
minority yeah I don't think ape of
whatever percentage they are nobody I
think is planning on the future it's not
nobody said we can wait until gay people
become 51% of the population have two
babies it's not gonna work for that
right and you know some of the other
examples who really cares about
cigarette smoking about eliminating
cigarette smoking is it maybe 1% of
people are passionate about this don't
care about it say hey smoking cigarettes
is really bad and you know the majority
people are just indifferent they're not
even it's not that they love tobacco or
like very few people feel it's a civil
right to be able to smoke tobacco some
do some do you know some people feel
that way that you should really have the
right to choose and smoke tobacco but
can you organize that minority and press
for change to eliminate tobacco smoking
in our society and I mean that's similar
also because the the campaigns to
eliminate tobacco have science on their
side and to some of the economics on
their side you know the government
doesn't want to the government doesn't
want to spend all this money on lung
cancer you know this is this kind of
thing so yeah disability and
what-have-you so yeah I that you're
correct that is how I see it the only
footnote is you know we're talking about
the the near future I mean is it
possible 300 years from now
five hundred years from now a thousand
years from now is it possible the
majority of people will be vegan like
1000 years from now yes it's possible
you know but you know there's no reason
you know I've got a plan within my
lifetime it will probably require some
kind of ecological disaster or well it
may you know I you know I wouldn't I
wouldn't say I think what has the change
fundamentally is is education and sure
it's possible I mean so today look okay
I'll give this this is a little bit
philosophically interesting too so I I
had a black friend in high school one
I'm from Canada we don't have that many
black people I had one black friend in
high school and I remember you know she
cared about politics you know she was a
bit of a political dissident or
political activist type of person and
she often very strongly held views of a
thing she knew nothing about so some
some things she knew about that's why
we're friends but like she just remember
she said to me this is one of several
examples of her she said to me that the
stars in the sky never moved the
constellations hadn't moved in thousands
of years that the story made static and
I said to her I'm sorry this is just
scientifically not true like don't you
realize the solar system is always
moving and the stars are moving and we
have all this evidence of that and know
like a thousand years ago they were in a
different position and we have a whole
there's a whole department at the
University that's about this you know
the relative positions of the stars you
know where you see them from the earth
they they have moved and this is this is
proven science and that was really
before the internet existed or at that
time it was just starting to exist I'm
not that old but normal people like me
did not have access to the Internet you
know today if you had that conversation
you just say look just get out your
phone or something or get out your
laptop computer just go to Google just
check you know how do they have the
stars remain static look it up or
something Wikipedia and you can check
that it definitely is much less than a
thousand you're just within 20 years we
may be at a point where their reliable
scientific facts that support veganism
are so instantly available to everybody
you know something much better than
Wikipedia that you can see by pressing
your earring you know uh oh yeah
oh this caught oh this causes cancer oh
this this causes heart attacks like
where this time information is available
so instantly and so ubiquitously I can
imagine that that changing and again
especially if the quality of education
in schools and universities changes I
can imagine that giving a big impetus
towards veganism there are some signs of
that yeah especially in the scientific
circles in between yes especially in
Germany you can already notice that
veganism is kind of creeping to the
mainstream accepted view of healthy
eating yes like especially with medical
doctors in Germany I think the u.s.
maybe the situation is a bit different
yeah maybe it's not your mainstream
there as it is in Germany well also I
think you've seen this in Germany in
most you know in Germany if you buy a
fridge or a dish washing machine where
there's a label on it about the
ecological impact like how much
electricity does it use and maybe how
much pollution so again if that becomes
a point we can touch your ear or touch
your glasses you're buying something and
you know cow milk has an ecological
impact rating of 76 based on air air
pollution water pollution energy use or
something and then next to it is soy
milk and soy milk you know so again that
also it can be quantified and the
quantification could become verifiable
unaccessible instantly so I appeal if
you guys have watched my channel from
time I rarely say something that's
optimistic because I'm normally talking
about the next 20 years I'm gonna die
people like I'm not I'm not planning on
living forever I've got to organize
vegan activism now but if you ask about
the next 300 years or next 1,000 years I
think some stuff like that will come
along and you know I just mentioned
along with that one of the changes have
seen in my lifetime there's more and
more sneering contempt for factual
knowledge there was a time when people
were really impressed if you happen to
know particular historical dates
particular facts if you had things
memorized but now because that kind of
dead
can be accessed through the internet
yeah there's less and less respect for
that so there we disadvantages to terms
of a culture of learning but I can see
that spurring on yeah get it make that
sure the point of our discussion about
belief and at the sensible like I guess
the reason I kind of felt let's say
unconvinced it's because a little bit
too vague but the idea like like to base
our moral judgments or moral compass on
such great concepts as the sense of the
absurd and the sense of disgust for
whatever other senses like it feels more
like a as if you feel feel moral
judgments not perceive them all right
reason to them I don't know it kind of
worries me on a basic level I don't know
why exactly what I think it should be a
lot more clearer if what I think I think
that I think that morality is worrying I
mean I think I think if you're being
honest with yourself about morality and
moral judgments I think you should be
worried so we already said I was a
teenager asking myself if I should
murder someone because I knew for a fact
this man was a pedophile on a rapist and
I knew he'd gotten away with it
I knew he'd continue to get away with it
because he was a judge he was part of
the system and the whole system
protected it and I had that I had to
reason through cognitively what is the
right thing for me to do or for me to
not do and hashtag spoilers I decided
not to do anything and I really had to
think through we know what was the right
decision here anyway and I felt more
pressure on me I you know I could say
more about that that's scary that's
worrying and you can even if you read
Shakespeare you know sorry I mean even
in Romeo and Juliet Romeo it's about a
lot of teenagers with knives and swords
getting into knife fights you know
tibalt die isn't everything you know I
mean for most of human history you have
teenagers making decisions about war and
death and so on and you're right it's
it's worrying I think I think the more
honest and accurate your moral
philosophy is the more worrying it's
going to be and the greater the dynamism
of doubt is going to be that we live
with doubt and uncertainty and passion
and and feeling involved now you know
are there philosophers who claim to have
constructed a reassuring rational and
for me a reassuring rational edifice of
universal reliable answers to these
questions yes
for example utilitarianism and I think
utilitarianism is a great example of why
all of that approach is deeply flawed
misleading dangerous and wrong and
utilitarianism has I think no influence
in legislation or world politics
directed at us this is this is one side
of it but you know the you know one of
the current schools of utilitarianism
they come to the conclusion that the way
you ought to live your life is to become
a high-powered executive banker or a
stockbroker that you should try to earn
as much money as possible and then
donate as much money to as possible to
charity they call it Iran to give this
is there a new model of the ideal this
is absurd to me in many ways but they
come to this through a cold clinical
formulaic style of reasoning they think
their trade and trading in moral moral
certainties you know but all those
systems of moral certainty are a joke to
me right I mean okay
so look if you just think about a
society that's a little bit detached
from you
okay so Saudi Arabia despicable social
system despicable government despicable
culture and religion for being all the
way honest and if I'm born wealthy in
Saudi Arabia you're telling me the best
thing I can do is get a high paying job
maybe as an oil company executive maybe
in finance or banking and and give to
charity that fits perfectly into a
Muslim society this is you know as a cat
at some culture it would be very well
regarded you can look up the social
system you can be a 100 percent
conformant
did not question anything your parents
did or anything you decided and the
Saudi government can keep abducting
people off the street and putting them
into ghost houses and assassinating
dissidents with snipers on rooftops and
and you have no problem with it because
you're a utilitarian who believes in
earned the give you know it's a Saudi
Arabia today I'm ok how about the United
States when slavery still existed does
he tell us very much no no it makes no
sense we live in a world with again
sense of absurdity I mean what do I what
did I just do the subtext of what I'm
doing is I'm appealing to your sense of
absurdity isn't it absurd to think
you're making the world a better place
by being a conformist and a banker and
an oil executive I mean sorry the oil
industry again is immoral and
ecologically flawed in its way too and
think you're making the world a better
place because you're gonna earn all this
money live in luxury and give and give
money to charity no I understand the
appeal I understand what some people
want to believe that but again I'm
pointing in challenging it here I'm
actually not appealing to your faith I'm
not appealing to you know your belief in
some other ideal I'm actually only
appealing to this limited use of reason
that's gonna show a fissure that's gonna
appeal to your your your sense of
absurdity and again it's Corian me even
worms if we use Nazi Germany or
something so if you're alive in Nazi
Germany or you're just gonna earn as
much money conform with the social
political system and give money to
charity what are you gonna say when the
Holocaust is over well I gave I gave 40
percent of my income to charity maybe I
gave 60 percent of my cocaine yeah so
yeah and and and you know look a my set
of ethical principles I know is not
universal but I don't feel that it's
only people born in Nazi Germany or born
in Saudi Arabia who have the weight of
history on their shoulders the weight of
even sorry for me as I can eat the
weight of genocide on their shoulders
the moral guilt of being part of an
immoral society of if you conform being
a conformist in an evil society I feel
that way about Canada - it's true in
Canada it may be more subtle than being
at Nazi Germany or
being in inside here but yeah I do I do
feel that way so uh yeah Universal
rational ethical principles are
reassuring and they're all the more
dangerous for that reason I would rather
live with that doubt and I even you know
preach to others sure you know get upset
you know find it yes all right you
didn't say you founded upsetting I'm
sorry you found that which word you used
the family worrying yeah Maria right but
be worried be more I think that's quite
a poor friend yeah like I think you have
to assume that human nature is that it's
fundamentally good or there's some good
news there bet that you are depending on
okay ok figure if you ever want to adopt
this see a great so it's a great that's
a great point
I think the exact opposite is true I
think that if you're Catholic or
communist or utilitarian if you believe
in an absolute ethical system you you
you therefore need to believe that
everyone is good or most people are good
I can flip it around for you what
percentage of people are cocaine addicts
or heroin addicts in a city like
Vancouver or in Toronto now as a
percentage it's not that many what
percentage of people are alcoholics in
countries where alcohol is available
everywhere even even let's extend video
game addicts how many people are
addicted to video games video games are
available to every work some some
whether it's 1 percent or 5 percent or
10 percent of people you know it's it's
8 percentage of people I don't believe
that human nature is universally good I
don't believe any of these things I
don't I don't believe period my system
is not based on belief however it should
be empirically obvious to everyone that
many people many at least 10% of people
reject and shun alcohol cocaine heroin
video games right some some people are
like that
whether it's 5% or 10% or 30% some and
for us I count myself in this category
what are we gonna do you know no it is
not given to everyone to take up the
work of government it is not given to
everyone to take up the work of research
it is not given to everyone to take up
the work of charity I
my father had nine children nine shall
live eight brothers and sisters I don't
think even one of them could can do what
I do not even when they we have a lot of
genetic material in common right I don't
think I'm in the majority I don't think
is eclis or politically represent the
majority but this is like when I talk
about genocide and Cree in a jib way but
even if we talk about Chinese or
Cambodia or something
not everyone can care about political
reality there are some people in
California and all they will ever care
about is getting high and skateboarding
using drugs to get high and then
skateboarding or riding a bicycle for
fun that's their whole life I'm not
trying to recruit them into politics
research and charity you know I'm not
you and look who turns up a meal so
right now I just happen to have met you
baby oh sorry I mean a little bit of
work but this is you know my channel is
sitting there what kind of person gets
interested in this you know failed the
former scholar of Buddhism former you
know you know kind of charity were her
you know political science majors so my
channel is talking about some of these
themes some people are gonna get
interested in what I have to offer and
the challenge I'm making to the
unexamined life of getting stoned and
riding your skateboard every day I just
look right at two more he's only 21 he
could he could decide to spend the rest
of his life
getting stoned or using drugs and riding
a skateboard I don't think you I think
if you did you would be miserable
someone else would be happy there were
tons of people who were happy in Adolf
Hitler's dystopia they didn't mind they
didn't care they did 9 a lot of them
were alcoholics probably sir
it was pretty high in Germany that guy
they're close they close the window and
drink more whiskey or drink more
schnapps get on with your lives right so
know this is the thing when you're not
I'm not making claims that are universal
about human nature or even human
potential I don't think might my own
brothers I don't think they have the
potential
I [ __ ] them you know and so we there's a
range of intelligence amongst my
brothers and sisters but one of my
brother's is so [ __ ] he's never said
a word in any language he can't even
speak English he can't speak any
language he's that severely returns so
you know I'd like to think I'm at the
opposite extreme right now maybe I'm in
the middle of the spectrum maybe we
should be optimistic maybe the spectrum
goes a lot higher if so you people are
not on YouTube the people on the other
end of the spectrum come on put me to
shame you make better YouTube videos
about philosophy politics and veganism
yeah but you know no I so there's
there's nothing Universal about it but
for those who have that that potential
you know I've got to reach out to them
and ask you know can't we do more and a
lot of the time so especially when I
talk to older people you know that's
what so you let's say you're talking to
a professor of political science someone
who thinks they've devoted their life to
doing something morally good you know
through politics and you say to them why
do you wear leather shoes why do you
wear that chopped up pieces of a dick
hip movement then they've never thought
about it you know you know will you talk
about ecology or you talk about these
nights so there are ways the people who
already are in some sense committed to
trying to make a positive difference in
the world again whether that's through
politics or research or charity or arts
I mean very rarely in my life but maybe
you talk to someone who's committed to
the arts and making a positive I think
that's you know you know it's these are
people who can be mobilized yeah sure so
summing up your but your view as I
understood it you you basically say that
the people who bring forth more change
society are like a very small minority
of elites kind of like Hannibal and
elitism okay what you said is
replicating some kind of elitist man and
those are the only people who matter and
you formulate your kind of arguments and
and philosophy based on how you can best
address the this late in this class of
people and convince them so it's a good
challenge in my view but I do I do
disagree with the characterization so
when I when I say people are a minority
that doesn't that doesn't make them
elite it just means there aren't that
many of them so you could have these
characteristics and people are in poor
you can be black or white you can be of
any ethnic group and you can and again
even within your own family and believe
me there's nothing genetic about it and
so on I don't even do you have brothers
you have one brother right okay so all
right so it's you know you have enough
diversity in your family and I'm sure
they're gonna take very different paths
in life from you I'm sorry I don't don't
want to get into this but you know I
just say within a given family so you
know so for one thing no it's not an
elite for another thing you're talking
about a minority of people that choose
themselves nobody else chooses them or
appoints them and you're also talking
about a minority that anyone can exit at
any time at any time you can go back to
you can choose to go use drugs and ride
your skateboard you can go to the
unexamined life you can get you can get
rid of all your moral responsibilities
we could go back to eating meat tomorrow
and the reasons what we're not going to
include discussed include the sense of
the absurd include a sense of reason
include you know these kind of negative
indicators if again you notice I'm not
using the word virtue it would mean but
you know you can construe it you can
turn it inside out and express this in
terms of positive virtues which is also
a valid way to describe it sure but sure
but like the number one reason if I try
deed me tomorrow I'd be disgusted and as
part of because of what the the meat
means I would be disgusted also to be
put in mercury into the ocean smashing
mercury
the containers like these many other
examples you know um yeah who I I in a
sense I know what it means or at least I
know what it means to me and there's a
there's a very powerful relationship
there that has in almost instinctual
forms of disgust and revulsion that
comes in so no sort of a just answer
your question in saying that it's a
minority of people I don't I don't mean
that it's in a lead they could be or
they could be primarily oppressed and
poor people depending on the the country
in the culture and you know the people
who are born in Saudi Arabia and look
around them and say this is observed
this has to change
they can be at any social class you know
same with Iran and so on so you know
this sense of challenging the values and
assumptions you were raised with I think
it can arise spontaneously kind of
almost anywhere with almost any kind of
person and if any I would say probably
people who are born rich or probably at
a disadvantage because they have they
have so many rewards for conforming and
not questioning you know and in the
culture and millio that Iran they have
so many or worth so I mean you know
there are rich people who get involved
in politics
but they're involved in politics not to
change anything just to keep things same
or just to make more money over to have
you know sorry
shut up the George W Bush would you know
I mean so no I would guess if anything
there's a bit of an inverse relationship
to the the privilege or former seventy I
guess don't you think that is exactly
because of this realization like most
people will not be part of this minority
that like universal or absolutist values
like the ones that religions offer hope
although ideologies are like on a purely
pragmatically yeah useful in society and
do play an important role like can you
like really just I am the sense for the
majority of people in society to to
leave them like to the right decisions
in their lives
sure no no no I I believe right right
right no I totally good question but you
know I'm
libertarian I don't believe in so your
phrasing was good there he asked do you
believe you can leave people to make
these these moral decisions in their
lives and my answer is no so a great
example circumcision or general
mutilation people paying for a surgeon
to use a knife and mutilate the penis of
a boy or the the vagina of a girl this
is very common in Muslim countries it's
also common in Judaism and in some forms
of Christianity this is a worldwide
faith-based phenomenon um if you have
the attitude you just leave people to
make their own decisions to this no I
don't believe that at all
I think that some minority of people
just the same with cigarette smoking if
you just leave people that smoke
cigarettes that's more than 10% of
people are gonna keep smoke easier I
don't know it's gonna vary from but
maybe in some countries it's 50 percent
someone dissent yeah but millions of
people are gonna keep smoking so no how
do you get rid of smoking public
education but sure to some extent
government enforcement regulation and
posters and I think there are all kinds
of ways you can guide a society to quit
smoking I would prefer not to have the
army o-positive that prefer to do it in
nonviolent ways but sure ultimately
there is a kind of coercion involved and
when I was a kid in Canada you know that
there were actually questions about how
how would the school treat students who
smoked cigarettes because like could
they actually be punished or was this in
effect like a civil right where the
students were were allowed to smoke
cigarettes in insert didn't so there are
there are difficult decision make but
also with with circumcision I I would
completely support you know in effect
the minority of the population who are
not an elite they're gonna be spread all
over the place wherever they are who
wake up and realize this is barbaric and
this is harmful you're harming infests
you know you're doing damage to people
biologically to wake up and get
organized and hold preferably through a
democratic process you know pass a law
and end this you know in the kind of
course it's better to do it through
public education it's better to do it in
a participatory way but ultimately no I
do believe in coercion
and you serve for me the perfect example
is water pollution you know I don't
believe you have the right to to dump
anything in the water but not your poo
not your sewage not your paint you're
finished painting your house you pour
the paint in the what no you know I
totally believe in of course public
education would help people may not
realize throwing paint is in the water
is a really serious form of pollution
education and so on is definitely
portent but ultimately yeah enforcement
sure yeah there's gonna be a minority of
people in government to make that
decision or when other people care about
it and lobby on it the same way gay
rights was a minority movement I think
it benefits the majority but it's
totally I might already move with you I
think how do you reconcile this view
with your rejection of using violence as
a means of bringing forth the socialist
or communist ideals and realize them in
a society like how do you yes a
government-sponsored violence or
coercion and to objectives and other
situations where you drop lying or is it
just that put matic like does it just
depend on the situation like you're
you're with government and push and
coercion if it serves a perceived public
good and how do you define it like this
is yeah I hope this is kind of a murky
situation you pull yourself in if you if
you stand if you don't have any problem
with government coercion no I don't know
if you can call it violence but yeah it
is under the strain of violence right
it's you can at least say yeah sure yeah
you'll go to jail if you get justified
it in in this context like of your other
views on communism and socialism
ingestion of violence generating
political activism for example like why
do you say the government can do it but
like also individuals or maybe vegan
activists or yeah I think right right no
but I I think if they also believe that
right they're doing something good like
for the public
right right right well no I mean you
know my my basic in this sense I'm a
mainstream Democrat not not in the
American sense but a mainstream person
who believes in democracy I think it's
fine for a government almost any kind of
government to come together and have
public consultations and debates and a
vote and decide for example that you
have to force children to brush their
teeth with fluoride you know that this
is something we can do collectively now
I just put in a footnote how perfectly
Democratic is that how collective is it
do you really just have a dictatorship
that symbolically goes around and
consults people or is it truly Democrats
a very important question but we set
that aside now but I finish the example
I believe in this this Democratic
conceit and no I do not believe in
grassroots violence or any
non-government any public minority
anyone special interests refuse accusing
violence which would be in this case
let's say a group of dentists get
together and they decide they're gonna
go around in a group and enforce their
idea of dental hygiene that they're
gonna show up and terrorize schools or
you know that they're gonna use again it
would be low-level violence but that
they're gonna go around and in a
agitprop rebellious terroristic manner
go around trying to force people this
start using a you know proper toothpaste
with fluoride in it and so on no I don't
so to me these two things are are
totally different um but I think what
you're really asking is do I believe
that the state use of force that
government use of force well you could
put it two ways one is it always
Democratic know of court sometimes them
presidents not and then two is it always
right whereas the public use of force is
always wrong so no and again so both
these things I am a nihilist
I mean empirically no I don't assume
that there were going to be cases where
the government is is horribly wrong and
should've be democratic if it's only a
minority of people yeah usually who have
this reaction whoa wait no wait oh great
that's a great that's a very good that's
a very good question but I think I think
for me that the the answer is a part of
the question the the obligation on that
enlightened minority is precisely to
convince the majority in order to
convince you know the plurality of
whoever is involved in political process
so I mean in Canada I mentioned this
example recently but back in the 1980s
so I was already alive the 1980s there
really was a public discourse about
whether or not it was acceptable for a
homosexual man to be employed as a
schoolteacher because at that time there
was prejudice and apprehension and fear
basically the fear was that any gay man
who was a schoolteacher would be trying
to have sex with students or would be
engaged in something like pet pedophilia
or pederasty you know something along
those lines and that was a very very
difficult debate to have where people
had to stand up and say no being a
homosexual is different from being a
pederast or a pedophile it is different
from you know not having the lack of
professionalism to have sex at the
office or whatever your job is you know
that these issues they really had to be
had to be talked through so the the
process of you know if you like Socratic
dialogue of building your case of
reasoning through and debating those
policies that is massively important and
you generally will not get that in a
military dictatorship or a monarchist
regime you know I don't know can come up
with some examples of military
dictatorships that had some kind of
public consultation process but I think
implicit in what you're asking is though
is this really a process of convincing
the majority or is it just a process of
convincing the minority of people who
control government the reality in every
country I know in the real world today
it's a process of convincing the
minority of people who control
government and again a great example be
something like seatbelt
you know there was this struggle in the
United States and the most countries
Scofield should seat belts for safety
and cars should that be mandatory should
it be universal should force car
companies to include this feature and it
they never convinced 100% of people I
don't think they convinced 51% of people
but they convinced people inside the
government in in Washington DC in the
United States you know and of course
they had scientific facts and yeah the
sticks and so on so yeah that's that's
the reality in the real world but I
think I can give you a lot of historical
examples that falsified this beautiful
for example in the Middle East yeah
there was a period were enlightened
dictators yes
secular dictators ruled in the Middle
East some up some of them are still yes
even in Iran the shop for your idea or
other kings and mops throughout the
Middle East and or military dictators
try to off some sort of signal even in
Syria like Riyadh regime they tried to
impose some kind of early Saddam Hussein
for his career right yeah I could impose
some kind of secular Western values with
the right some aspects yeah and not
others but just like to do that and some
more successful but you can see the
backlash right example in the running in
the Iranian Islamic Revolution yeah what
happened like you can still see the I
did actually study these examples on
University so I do act my the thing I'm
pretending I actually formally started
in stir this back at University of
Toronto in 1999 no no actually it would
have been 2000 or 2001 I was just before
September 11th but anyway yeah yeah all
right and I think you can obviously see
that it didn't look like the amount of
resentment the people felt yes that's
right the elite secular turn governing
yes circles like it was immense and then
and it also caused the resentment of
singer of secularism and democracy
itself
yeah they got associated with that's
right foreign traitor that they grab
redo with Western powers with their with
the colonial house and I think this is a
major example where this like approach
didn't work at all
like especially
very delicate and sensitive issues that
are very deeply connected with religion
and more values and culture what about
justice II would like seatbelts right
and and autumn come yes it is like
homosexuality though because that's also
very linked to religion yeah yeah maybe
yeah we work all the time but oh but
yeah but again my I don't claim so you
can I claim that nihilism nihilism is
not a future utopia nihilism is the
reality beneath the veneer of ideology
here and now this is this is the guy I
agree you know these are exactly as you
say these are failures but to me this
kind of affirms my hypothesis doesn't
doesn't challenge it so another failure
in many ways is democracy in China by
the way necessary the whole of China in
the fill of democracy there is another
instructive example um but look I can
ask you this question
so in Iran or we could use many other
examples but it would take it wrong as
as an example is it better for the
progress of Iran to be achieved through
let's say public education cultural
transformation of the masses and then
transformation in the government after
this transmission is taking place or is
it better to impose a dictatorship with
a different sense of values and then
have the violence of that dictatorship
impose that change on the people you
know now I'm simplifying the situation
but only giving you two options because
of these two options there's a whole
list of gray areas in between where most
of real human history have us and look
even within the history of England you
know cultural changes that happen in
England and so on
you do get you do get a lot of these
questions of how do you impose a
cultural trend even linguistic change I
mean even achieving literacy or creating
a single national language instead of
having local regional languages to some
extent there's a carrot and to some
extent there's a stick to some extent
there's democracy and public
participation to some extent there's you
know a level of coercion even if the
coercion is look if you want to join the
army you know if you want to get a
government job if you want to call
for this then you have to have learned
this language or done this thing or
conform to these values would have there
in some way you know these these kinds
of impetuses now yes oh sorry I asked
this question I assume your answer is
not that you would prefer to have you
know a brutal dictatorship enforcing
change ya know if it's right
right and the the problem is time right
I mean the problem is do we have 100
years right that's that's really for
veganism also it's a question do we have
a hundred years to do this grassroots
you know from the bottom up and the
problem is also commitment to a place
now why do I say this right now Canada
will accept 100% of refugee applicants
basically from all that's our principle
in Canada anyone who is a homosexual in
Iran or Saudi Arabia can come to Canada
they merely need to say the word refugee
and then they can ask for a translator
they don't need to speak English and
then they can explain that they were
homosexual and they're oppressed in
their native country and they will be
granted permanent residency and can't
even need to demonstrate they feel
actually oh can I claim then he is you
know the answer you don't need to that's
correct
you do not need to prove anything so
that is also a source of tension it's
it's rare that people make fake claims
it will be gay but there are other
claims to being a refugee you can many
people do fake and there's there's
evidences so no that's this is all
solution no look I mentioned this is an
extreme example other people like okay
right now democracy in Cambodia so in
case you don't know that
Cambodia has an ocean border but it's
mostly land borders if you live in
Cambodia and you want democracy are you
gonna risk your life and struggle for
democracy or are you gonna walk to
Thailand you can literally walk to
Thailand and go live there
and have a better life there you know
and he's Sri Lau so used to live in Laos
at some points in time
then more allow people living outside of
Laos than inside of Laos when life is
bad in Laos they all even go to Thailand
you can just walk the Thailand you know
um you cross the border and get work
there in a factory or on a farm
economically you lead a better life so
yeah this is not being a refugee this is
just being a migrant migrant worker or
something yeah so and now that is a
problem that existed to a very very
limited extent 300 years ago you know to
some extent people could migrate and
leave and so on and now it's it's a it's
a it's a huge factor and then beneath
that you can stay in the same country
but just check out mentally right you
can keep living in Malaysia but every
day watch movies from Japan read books
from Japan watch pornography from Japan
maybe get an internet girlfriend it's
since your fan talk to people on the
internet and Japanese you know you can
stay where you're living and just live a
fantasy life of video games and maybe
drugs and alcohol help too you know you
can just disengage from reality you know
obviously that always existed to some
extent historically but yeah there were
a lot of things that can that completely
worthless so I mean commitment to a
place that that's an irrational aspect
of of political science that's normally
taken for granted and we now have to
think much more much more nihilistic
aliy about we have to question that you
know who really has an attachment I
don't even mean a country to a town to a
city where you know when the local
economy collapses they say no I'm gonna
stay here and work hard and build a
better future for this town you know
that that kind of commitment when the
government is corrupt they say okay I'm
gonna stay here and fight corruption
even if it takes years of my life and
cost me a lot of money and makes me go
because you know even within Canada it's
a huge issue you know local government
is corrupt who cares you know if you can
just move somewhere else if you can just
ignore it and go somewhere else so these
other things and yeah I think you you
probably feel that me of the Diaspora
from over almost everything
now Syria the huge numbers people are
leaving Syria they're not going to stay
and fight for democracy in Syria this
has been happening for so many years as
well so this is a phenomena whether
you're they're refugees or migrants not
all of them have a formal refugee status
in Oporto of course it's appealing
whether they escaped from Syria to
Canada or just from Syria to Jordan or
Lebanon you know they may go a short
distance but this this is a huge vector
now yeah yeah
how much done you have uh nobody go I
can go on yeah okay next question
yeah I am I am very exhausted very
jet-lagged but I feel this is all I can
do now I'm not I'm not gonna start
studying Chinese in this condition so
I'd rather talk for politics great for
my girlfriend Melissa this is a live
YouTube video so I guess it's basically
the same time laughter how much
democracy and let's say elitist and
oligarchy or government do you like to
see in a specific government because you
said that democracy is fundamentally
unequal you shouldn't be here you want
to see the democracy that's or democracy
is a representative government of the
poor because they are the majority but
at the same time that's actually not
while at the same time as we mentioned
earlier like we said that like more
pleasant more change like at the end
there has to be somewhat enforced this
leat from above right the county looking
salvos that's where I was like okay it's
kind of hard to see okay good so the
good question but for me it is an easy
question to answer this doesn't you know
this isn't to me a kind of unexpected
audience question all I want government
to be for the poor not because the poor
of the majority in Canada I don't think
the poor are the majority of people in
kenner
maybe it's 30 percent it's how we define
it but it's way less than 50 so in
Canada depending ten percent not that
Canada
a very rich country but you you just
came from Luxembourg me oh you came
through lots of you no sir you wouldn't
let some but for a few hours but uh as
you know this but some people if they
are almost nobody in Luxembourg is poor
look if they have a very tiny number of
people who are poor it's one of the it's
one of the wealthiest countries were but
also one of the least poor so they have
a very very small number for the poor a
small minority there um so it's not now
of course I mean it's a question what
percentage of people are poor in China
but Laos or Cambodia of Livni countries
were definitely the majority or four so
sometimes the poor or a majority and
sometimes there are minority um I do not
it's not it is not because the poor are
the majority that I want government by
the poor and for the poor um it's
because the poor are the people who need
government health who need government
infrastructure so I mean even in the
example of so CEO of a train system the
train system it doesn't really matter if
it works well for the rich no if it does
that's nice like it's nice if there's a
first-class carriage where rich people
can drink champagne we could have a
swimming pool on the train so rich
people can pay extra my pay a hundred
dollars to go swimming you have a son I
don't care that doesn't really matter
for society but it's tremendously
important that you have seats on the
train that are so cheap or subsidized
that an unemployed poor person looking
for a job can take the train from city
to city and go and do job applications
or go and get government benefits or go
to the hospital
right now again like hospitals sorry I
could go on with the money samples if
hospitals don't work for the rich they
have alternatives they have options they
have ways to cope because they have
money the poor need those government
services now I could say this to some
extent about education etc so there it
is a little bit different it's not
really the same for education as it is
for a train service but broadly speaking
you know you you get my point
now um I have never known in the history
of the world a society where the rich
were so marginalized and voiceless that
we really had to work
not not being that the government bored
them you know the government just
doesn't care about the millionaire's who
own factories you know there was enough
in government but I mean it's
theoretically possible it's pretty close
to theoretically impossible so you know
that this is the issue of the government
emphasis on the poor but as I've already
said the poor may be a minority they may
be a small minority in a very successful
democracy now the other type of minority
you're talking about ultimately are the
people who care so you know if you have
an open public consultation if you have
an open democratic process with a series
of meetings to discuss sewage treatment
how is the government going to build a
new sewage treatment we just had this in
Victoria the city I live in Canada and
way back in the year 2000 I was involved
in those that democratic process in
Toronto when the City of Toronto was
planning a new it was called the the
wastewater management plan wastewater
sounds nicer than poo poo management
plan right um
who comes to the meeting I do I I'm the
kind of person who come back here about
ecology I care about politics I care
about this next but if you don't force
people to go against their will you know
that is gonna be a minority of people no
I think actually there are questions of
maybe not forcing people but
incentivizing people creating a culture
and even an economy where there are
enough positive incentives that I mean
you know maybe you have to have a
minimum we say look if we don't have ten
percent of people participating in this
we're not gonna make the decision at all
look we have to have a certain
percentage of the public really involved
in this process otherwise we're not
going to commit ten billion dollars to
this because the costs of these
decisions can be huge you know maybe
there is in ancient Athens they would
pay a salary to people they would pay
three Oh balls a day for you to come to
an important public meeting and
holiday if it was a less important
minute so you would get paid a little
bit of money to come and spend all day
now there are other things involved
there is a role of intelligence an
education involved but these people
going to choose themselves i've sat down
and gone through technical documents
about air pollution water pollution and
stuff and when I was in Cambodia and
Laos they were different in Laos
I got deeply involved in government
policy on rubber farming on the
different types of agriculture and
farming the governor's maybe I'm not an
expert in in agricultural engineering
and you're not either trust me you're
smart enough to sit down and read that
stuff even part of it is when you see
something you don't understand going and
finding a book going and looking it up
figuring out what's going on here being
able to scrutinize the statistics so you
don't you don't need to be an expert in
agriculture or sewage treatment or
anything but you need to be someone with
a kind of public spirit and sense of
responsibility and curiosity and Verve
and tenacity and not everybody can care
about every issue right so in saying a
minority of people are gonna care that
ultimately I don't minority people are
going to be involved in the decision I
don't mean the rich or the poor I mean
that when you have real democracy not
everyone is good is going to be
committed on every issue now is that a
problem yes
gay rights as an example two types of
people in Canada were highly motivated
about gay rights people who were gay
themselves and the Catholic Church and
they were on opposite ends so at that
time I mean I don't remember his long
being a major player in Canada we have a
lot of Catholics in Canada we didn't at
that time very many Muslims but I'm sure
also you know conservative Muslims had a
position on it and so on so you know one
of the problems is when you when you
when you involve too small a percentage
of the public you're gonna get the
polarization of special interests and
not a representation of the broader
society so yeah there are if there are
factors to be managed get a design
answer question is
see for me you asked a good question but
I don't feel it's contradictory or
difficult yeah yeah I just wanted to
know like the underlying unifying
philosophy sometimes right I just right
right right
resin pieces right and just want to
connect them yeah so I like it it's kind
of a cynical view of human nature and
impalas yeah
but the best thing in life is when those
minorities can choose themselves when
people can slope though so you know um
even something like museums and art you
cannot leave questions about art in the
hands of people who happen to be born
rich which in most societies what it is
someone is born rich their
great-grandfather bought many paintings
maybe they have paintings like here in
Europe there are people their
great-grandfather bought paintings and
put them in a castle and now here they
are today and they don't care about art
whenever in there on this this powerful
position in the art world they have
money they have an old collection of
paintings and they're gonna be
influential that way how how do people
how does the public how it is a
democracy make questions about art the
answer questions of a heart that that
really affects the public and that
involve millions and millions of dollars
of taxpayers money you know Mendes costs
with tremendous long-term consequences
you know that's a situation where it's
so fundamentally elitist in its bias
even aristocratic in its bias that is
very hard to create a meaningful
Democratic you know process that will
involve people and we're I mean
definitely the vast majority of the poor
they don't care they don't think it's
their issue you know they're not going
to be motivated even in the same way
they may be motivated on gay rights or
something yeah so these are challenges
yeah these are so you say a service
funny you saying it's a it's a cynical
view of human nature you know again all
the ancient Greeks they they start from
this assumption that when people get
involved in in politics they are they
are pursuing their self-interest you
know their interest as a person or as a
class but I mean you know you're ready
sample of this so you know you you you
used to think about veganism in terms of
your health which is one kind of self
interest and then it broadened you
started thinking about in terms of
ecology and in terms of politics it's
all self interest but you you've become
more and more enlightened in your
self-interest yeah and your self
interest is in aggrandizing and involves
other people in the whole world your
whole country you know takes on these
takes on these other dimensions yeah so
means self interest is not necessarily
narrow and is not necessarily
destructive or or focused on your own
entertainment or something else behind
Wow dude you have more that varied over
the question list you mm-hmm I think I
exhausted the topics I wanted to us look
yeah okay so let me ask let me ask you a
question that you're at a turning four
in your life you're now 21 so five years
from now you're gonna be 26 it's one of
the questions I'd like to ask people
what do you think you are gonna do not
what you can't do you will do what do
you think is gonna happen for you and
the future of the vegan movement like um
I still don't know what what I can do
like the context of a vegan movement
because I'm involved in like science and
research right now but I'm pursuing a
career in scientific researcher and for
that also in Germany yeah so I'm not
sure if I if I'm going to be politically
active right as you are know I'm seeking
it like I'm searching for the options
and I think we both know there is a way
to be a kind of science scientist
activist or an active within science
yeah yeah but I've spent so much time
like just concentrating on the science
yeah and I I didn't treat and explore
like
percent is enough it's point to really
like know what what the options are
right for me as a political as an
inspiring political activist in there
and the other option and the other issue
is that I'm not sure if I want to be
merely a an activist in the right like
the vegan seem like sure I was my
political concerns were always as a
broader and more related to human
affairs don't like veganism but like the
vegan a spit cup add more more important
the last couple of years I guess yeah so
I'm still sorting out like I don't have
a coherent view of my like my future or
what I want to do veganism is certainly
unique in that it is possible for you to
you know directly apply the sciences to
or you know but look I mentioned this
example all the time educating the
public about leather you know the the
biochemistry of leather of how its
produced of the pollution and rivers the
negative effects on the employees the
leather workers the people who make the
leather in theory the negative health
effects even though the person who wears
the leather keeps it in their home
leather gives off chromium hexane into
the air and they breathe it you know
this is straight biochemistry you know
and ie
obviously I do not have the expertise to
talk about that so I mean that that's
that's an example somewhere within your
of expertise you could do it and so I
think that's something may be exciting
for someone of the sciences on the other
hand you know obviously I understand
what you're saying there's this fear of
you know real politics you know so we
say war politics electoral politics
which you know seems to have so little
you know so little common ground with
with veganism yes look and it's also
some kind of a fear of commitment to a
two-year this if we can very narrow and
specifically defined kind of activism
yes because it takes time and it's risky
and if you commit yourself for a number
of users it's putting or it's just like
there's something else and then switch
and especially like
know about your experience yes and they
really made me think twice and be a lot
more careful when deciding for my breath
future is about career and ya know what
a play in politics
no I mean I think that the
responsibilities you adopt become your
identity so I mean you know it's not
having a kid that makes you a father
it's it's worrying about your kid yeah
you know it's the responsibility you
adopt and you you don't you know you you
become a father it becomes part of your
character you become a parent and in the
same way you take on a responsibility
for veganism or let's say you take on
responsibilities for Syrian refugees you
start a charity you're doing some work
with resettling and helping Syrian
refugees or any possible political
commitment like that and yeah it does
become part of who you are or part of
who you are perceived to be at least and
in a very a very dynamic way and I think
it you know what kind of contaminates
everything else you've got you've got
going on in your life so but we're just
one answer what one more thing there on
that exact issue commitment I never
would have become a vegan activist the
only if if my other aspirations had been
more successful right so just a couple
years ago I was trying to be an activist
for her curry in a jib way for
indigenous peoples of Canada and as
languages so really language education
and cultural political change attached
to indigenous peoples of Canada Korean
ship whale Kong keyonna languages that's
what I wanted to do politically with the
rest of my life I wanted to be a vegan
guy a guy who happened to be being I
want to be vegan but involved in
politics of political reform education
reform the future of the future of
Canada - genocide and non genocide all
future Canada theses so that's that's
what I wanted to do and when that failed
you know veganism became my primary
political
that's the appropriate ISM and for those
who don't know it's taking over my life
in a very real way now because now I'm
gonna actually get a degree in cuisine
as a baker and get involved with with
vegan food as a platform for activism
it's because I'm Agatha
yeah and that does that contaminates
everything else I do that becomes my
identity yeah you become a father but
even more or you become a baker that's
who you are the other people that say
they they perceive you I can definitely
relate to that because like my initial
driving factor that that caused me to
get into biochemistry and you're
studying some like science at University
um is that I spent so much like just
individually on my own initiative
studying and researching like biology
evolution in molecular biology
biochemistry in the context of me like
the creation/evolution debate oh really
like it was going on in Jordan and they
I don't know how exactly what flex when
atheist friend who like challenged my
views that creationist oh yeah maybe
when I was 15 or 16 ah yeah it kind of
got me like spontaneously in this field
and I I got drawn in and I'm fascinated
by it like like your biology in genetics
in and so forth in and just like and
after four or five years I found myself
at the level of a graduate student and
yeah maybe not like a possible do it
what kind of a graduate student like you
who's been studying it for like three or
four years I know and I just felt that I
had to like like just go on with it like
yeah like if if I didn't like do it like
I just felt some kind of responsibility
because I was like aware of it I I could
do it I was interested in and because
the dismal state of science education in
Jordan right yeah right I thought some
kind of responsibility maybe not a
drained use like since of right but kind
of just for my surroundings like okay so
education as activism or something yeah
I'm still thinking like about like
opening a maybe kind of a scientific
research institute or education
scientific research education maybe like
there to like improve the state of
education and and also the the
perceptional of the scientific method
and and the scientific way of thinking
like it's it's pretty good yeah I don't
think you can imagine maybe you can like
you have a lot of experience like how
poorly the level of education there is
especially when it comes to the sciences
and yes the humanities even worse like
forget about that but I'm just talking
about like basically like an actual
science maybe the engineering and then
medicine has has a lot more for it
because there's a lot of might natural
science and humanities like it's letting
me lik sit there and the level of
education there is pretty pouring but I
think I think you'd agree also there's a
change in the sense of social
responsibility and political attitude
when you shift from regarding human
beings as angels missing wings to being
biological creatures when you shift from
regarding the soul as something primary
and the body is secondary to regarding
people as just biologically real
accidents of evolution you know I said
oh yeah when you stop when you switch
from an essentialist view or a theistic
view or you know magical view of what
humans are and why they're on earth and
and what are their their functions you
know to realizing how how half has been
so I give you an example which is you
know related to nutrition you know dogs
don't need vitamin C but we do you know
what I mean actually the majority of
land mammals don't need vitamin C but
happens we do you know what I mean
there's this different you know who
ended up in terms of the evolutionary
chain you know randomly many other
mammals including all the quadrupeds can
tolerate including herbivore herbivores
quadrupeds like deer can tolerate meat
much better than we do and can even
Tovah cannibalism Canadian cannibalism
better than we do
we have happened to have a set of
biological characteristics nobody
planned it we tolerate meat really
poorly we call tolerant cannibalism very
very poorly you know the health
consequences for human cannibalism are
as bad but it's not you know it's not a
moral judgment on the part of a creator
you know so I just say you know that's
um I you know I think that's a subtle
and pervasive shift I think of some
level like you we really ever choose our
roles like we play in all life and paths
we take but ok you have a have some
choices but they're really limited and
the limits are just put on you like what
you can choose from is very limited at
the end of the day and you can't control
that you may be careful talk between a
couple of choices or three or four and
you don't even know where that will lead
you like in the anything yeah I think as
you get older I think that'll change I
think what you've just said you know I
think people that's really tragically
true at age 13 you know I can age 13
what are your choices and to some extent
my choices were presented to me by
things like Batman it is cultural
garbage that's you know mainstream
corporate stuff you know these are your
ideas about the outside world are very
limited but as you get older even it can
say age 13 versus age 23 you know the
number of colors on your palette that
you're painting with you have more and
more colors you can use you have more
and more objective experiences in the
real world and examples you can draw
from and you start to have more and more
of ability to it to generate your own
cultural values sweet generous to
generate your own ideas be they
political or or scientific or economic
or what-have-you but sure back at age 13
I can remember saying I'll give you two
examples okay but I remember saying to
people on the schoolyard you know it's
it's not like this everywhere
you know in Singapore things are really
different you know I knew a little bit
about political reality in Singapore you
know it may not see enjoyed Singapore is
so shockingly different a society
it is the Singapore was uh was an
example for me that way of a different
society this isn't human nature this
isn't universal we can question a man
earlier oh saying I think there are kids
growing up in Malaysia growing up in
Indonesia in a Muslim culture but they
watched cartoons from Japan and they see
a different society and I get it doesn't
have to be this way so at an early age
yeah I think you probably are mostly
working from you know examples of real
world real world examples I heard an
interview with an Inuit man so the Inuit
live in the furthest north part of
Canada some people still refer to them
as Eskimo but Inuit is the proper term
so they live in the ice and snow and he
talked about how amazingly bleak his
life was until he happened to have a job
or his coworker was a black American man
an african-american man from somewhere
far to the south I forget where he was
from maybe he was from Florida maybe
some Chicago but he was from a totally
different climate and you know one
things that guy explained to his
coworker on the job when they were
talking about life and politics but he
really explained them you know life is
not like this everywhere and if if your
whole life all you have known is the
frozen snow and peculiar political
situation in Arctic Canada as you know
an Inuit person who at that time had a
very strange you know political and
religious position in Canada you know
the government trying to force you to
become Christian and so on the policies
of that that time I think it's true when
you're younger you know what which is
true but as you get older I think that
the the creative role you play in the
creation of values increases and the
destructive role you can play in
demolishing or disassembling what you've
passively received from society from
your parents from religion I think that
also increases a lot now but my Maya
in my experience maybe that's not
necessarily like a blessing always cause
yeah like when I was in Jordan I I was
like a lot more motivated than now
because I've like I felt them the direct
direct influence and and role I had to
play right in society through studying
this yeah thank biochemistry for example
and and I could see the evasive me shy I
had had to fill my head before its
ability to to fill there and here it's
kind of very indirect and like I can't
see like the direct purpose of of my
original initial decision anymore and
and that what that's what's called my
initial life loss of motivation and a I
don't know a sense of attachment to what
I do here like in the past year Renison
since I came to Germany yeah but like I
just told myself I had to move on
because I already put like four or five
years in the street and this and I yeah
I don't know it's it's kind of a hard
question did you just move on like go on
because you already invested so much
time in it and it's kind of
irresponsible to throw it away
it doesn't really hear but maybe to have
a direct connection like to the to the
real world to the reality on the ground
what you want to do with what you aspire
to I don't know it's it's a hard hard
decision to make sometimes but I'm just
assuring myself but in the future like
when I get back I'm not gonna like much
but we're gonna see the fruits of my
labor and what is it you're saying this
about biochemistry but you're not saying
it about veganism or cilantro I'm just
saying you know because this would be
true for any any commitment yeah you
know what the realization that your your
your role and your responsibility it is
simply whatever you make it I mean it's
it's simultaneously liberating and
terrifying that's right you have no duty
except the duty you take upon yourself
so your duty could be anything but it's
going to be something and look um you
know I said recently in one of the
videos in passing I said look I don't
expect
Wayne Siong to speak Chinese he's a
chinese-american guy just because his
ancestry is Chinese I don't want to
learn Hebrew you know some of my answer
they're Jewish but I don't doesn't mean
I want to learn Hebrew I didn't inherit
a responsibility to study Cambodia and
the Cambodian language my responsibility
my sense of duty and purpose was purely
elective you know it's something I took
upon myself you know but out of that
came a tremendous sense of motivation
duty duty in and purposes yeah you know
and now of course it ended tragically it
was heartbreaking for me
you know I didn't inherit any sense of
duty and purpose with Korea or Japan or
veganism there it you know you you
create it so again this is my sense of
being a blank canvas or a blank
chalkboard this is this is somewhere you
are in the position of projecting these
things you don't receive duty from your
parents or from the gods or to have you
let's say that is simultaneously
liberating liberating and empowering but
also terrifying and it opens the door to
you realize when you look at say the guy
in California someone in California who
just uses drugs and rides a skateboard
all day you realize that could be me you
know there isn't an essential difference
between us there's a there's a merely
extrinsic difference and an elective
difference you know there's merely you
know there's this the you know it's a
Super Bowl obstacle it's not an
insuperable obstacle that that divides
us you know yes how would you film your
life like this view would you say that
people should do what they can do best
oh like in their lives like according to
their life skills and abilities what do
you think people just could just do what
what seems to be like the response or
the in depth moment like even if they're
not like the best person to do that well
yeah I think look I think that's that's
like many people struggle with what if
you feel like your personal way to make
the world a better place is architecture
okay and then you commit to it you try
to do it let's say you're terrible at
math you're terrible at drawing you
really are bad at the geometry involved
in architecture or let's say you just
lack the attention to
like there's certain kinds of mental
qualities you need as an architect or
something and you're just terrible at
architecture you know how would you know
at the start of the process that this
isn't your talent this isn't your
ability yeah you know what I mean
so know you asked an interesting
question but I think you already know
that nobody knows the answer um so I
mean Cambodia is a good example how
would I know if I can learn the
Cambodian language and I can try but
maybe it's actually impossible and
believed for some it's a very hard
language to learn for some people it
would be impossible or how would I know
if Cambodian culture would even accept
me and I just mean in a limited sense
you know that I wouldn't be totally
rejected and hated there as a foreign or
in an outsider some guys are I could
give you some examples of why that is
Cambodian cultures is very tolerant of
homosexuals but it's very clearly oh yes
yeah but it's very intolerant of a man
with long hair that's totally
unacceptable though so you if you're
whether you're straight or gay it
doesn't matter whether that's them say
they're Buddhist culture yes but uh
different cultures take Buddhism and the
inspiration of Buddhism in different
directions so you know the Cambodian
attitude towards homosexuality is
totally different from the Japanese
attitude or the attitude in sri lanka
it's even very different from Thailand
and Laos so yeah Buddhism is a huge
factor in all these but then you have
what the culture did with Buddhism this
is very different from a place another
so I just mentioned you know what is it
possible for me to do the kind of
research I want to do in Cambodia the
kind of humanitarian work I want to do
in Cambodia those questions I can't know
that when I'm when I'm starting to try
and it gave me so V but we your artis
example sewage sewers and sewage
treatment so on maybe I feel this is the
way I can make a pause the difference
and then I find out that it isn't so
that's a process of trying that leads to
you learning about the society you live
in and the political system and learning
about yourself so I know it's too
say a process of self-discovery is the
most abused concept in the human
language
many of these YouTube channels are gonna
tell you to get on a process of
self-discovery by using drugs or
drinking alcohol or LSD or or go or have
sex with 30 people or some crap like
this okay I'm sorry
under as long as it's under 300 people
okay you know what this actually do
think there's a role for self-discovery
there but I don't know I know but the
numbers I know what the quantity oh okay
at some point at some point it's not
self-discovery anymore people
what's when you get to a hundred we'll
talk I don't know I want to put a number
on now but if you know but in a very
meaningful sense I think it's a bit of a
sickness in our culture that nobody
thinks doing research doing charity
doing humanitarian work and doing direct
political activism like going to City
Hall and lobbying on sewage system that
that's a process of self-discovery but
it is you know now again for somebody it
might be architecture it might be web
sales and of course language and
cross-cultural work now so look I don't
yeah I think I maybe said this once on
the channel before um I do like South
Korean culture of course there are
things I dislike about but broadly
speaking um in a totally different way I
do like a lotion culture the culture of
Laos I can say things average they're
totally adulterous and I've got I really
dislike Cambodian culture I didn't know
that right
like you see my point here is I don't
like all cultures that's not possible
you know if you like the culture and
Germany you're probably not gonna like
the culture in England I mean there's
the real differences here you know if
you like one you you can't possibly like
them all or like them all equally some
things are gonna bother you more but
that in itself being engaged in research
in humanitarian work in this stuff you
may think it's shallow but it's really
not it was really a pretty profound
confrontation with who I am when I
realized what it was about Cambodian
culture I couldn't
that I that I hate it and it differences
even though I just said Laos is a
positive example
so give you a specific example is the
cowardice it's a very it's a very
cowardly culture people will people will
be your friend but they won't back you
up they won't take wrists they won't
take risks very conformist very gormless
very conflict avoiding people don't have
a sense of pride and backbone and
backing you up or doing the right things
that's the right thing to do even if
you're risking you know and by the way
I've been told I really don't know why
should have told them that Grevy's are
actually the opposite that people from
the Maghreb know if they're your friend
they're gonna come to court and testify
that you're innocent because they were
there and they saw you and they know
you're innocent and they they feel very
more this this is what I was told in
France that common okay
[Music]
but there's an issue of you know if even
if it's a risk to me you know I'm gonna
stand up and do the right thing because
in your eye and I'm gonna show my
courage because you're my friend and I'm
gonna do this and Lao culture is the
officer you I never even thought about
that like you know I never thought about
what this courage mean to me and in what
way am i different from Canadian culture
and what why am i different from Lotion
culture and British culture and you know
that experience yeah it's real research
it's political it's humanitarian but
yeah there's also a kind of
self-discovery there that I you know it
never would have come up if I'd stayed
at home reading books you can learn a
lot from books but yeah yeah and so on
for for Cambodia and Korean a jimp way
and so on yeah yeah
Susu Susu apart so directly at your
question the the real answer has to do
with trial and error and failure and
fail try horror be sincere get your
heart broken try again and you know
maybe some people who are the most
disadvantaged you know sometimes you
meet someone you meet a young man and at
age 18 he started doing computer
programming and he was successful
immediately
made a lot of money so for my generation
I met a bunch guys if they happen to
make a lot of money when they were still
18 19 years old because they did
computer programming in the 1990s when
it was easy to make money fast there and
then they never kind of asked these
questions they never had this kind of
self-discovery challenging and being
challenged so that that can be that can
be an issue think there's no escaping
like they're fumbling and failure this
kind of discovery well just I think I
think there is escaping it but maybe
it's even more tragic when you escape it
and maybe it's even worse when you don't
have that you know oh the like the
actual barrier that when I think like if
I'm if I want to be a scientist and if I
study a scientific field I want to be
the best scientist possible yes right
and that means like dedication right
getting myself to this work 100% but at
the same time sometimes I feel some kind
of a possibility to be politically
politically active in them for example
now remedy and to do that you have we
have to spend a lot of time but to learn
about the culture about the history of
politics and like it's impossible to be
like a the best scientist and the best
like political activist all political
figure
yeah like when at what point do you
decide okay I'm gonna yeah I'm gonna
ditch like for example being a scientist
to learn to dedicate myself to be
political like those at what point do
you say okay it doesn't make any sense
anymore for me to go on like this I'm
gonna choose a whole nother path but
when when dudes reach this point like
because yeah you can always kind of
change and prove and yeah yeah you can
choose them okay it's gonna be better or
next year next five years maybe if I
just do good right hard Berlin and will
continue and like don't I could be
responsible and hold on to my right your
responsibility as a scientist for
example or as a student I think so I
think the honest answer that question is
you'll make that decision on the basis
of outcomes when it is you know so if
you are
position where you can have real
political power we can make a real
difference or you can impact the lives
of maybe just hundreds of people you
know you're friends with the mayor I
mean it's gonna be something as minor as
that yeah there's a position in local
city government that so maybe it's only
the influence of commune a few thousand
I think that's exactly when the
temptation fellas great to say no I have
to devote myself to politics yeah and
you know the opposite is when you you
really feel your voice can't make any
difference that you give up politics so
you say well I can't like I'm not even
gonna change things four or five people
or Tempe and we own again a point like
this video right now is gonna be watched
by more people and have a meaningful
influence on more people then if I wrote
an academic paper and presented it at a
conference and again still to this day
many of my friends and people I talk to
you have PhDs and go to conferences now
this is not so there are a lot of things
in between you know there's actually
having political power working for the
mayor or working for the provincial
government or something like this and
there's being totally voiceless and
feeling totally hopeless and most of us
most of the time are somewhere in
between you know well I have this
YouTube channel I can organize a banquet
with 50 people promoting vegan
businesses or something you know there's
some little thing you can do I can I
could make a t-shirt for most be
featured at something you know I've
written a story book by the way sorry I
just was talking to an illustrator for
the first time someone really offered to
illustrate the story book for free as a
form of activism and I was laughing and
saying to him well you know you're the
first guy to say you wanted to do it for
free yeah what else we're talking about
how much money they were gonna make it
of this I don't know if they'll work out
but that's still a project I've started
doing and still want to do you know
publisher so yeah I think I think that's
the reality is it's the magnitude of the
outcomes that are gonna guide you and
again you can see I'm to me this is a
nihilistic kind of thing and it's you
know I think that's ultimately what
what's gonna what's gonna go ahead there
yeah and you know and so in the flip
side is what would tempt you to give up
politics on the other sides is this the
feeling you can't make a difference but
then the other side what if you're in a
position in your business where you say
look if I quit politics and put all my
energy into business I can make so much
money in the next five years or maybe I
can do do something artistically or you
know creatively or something you know
maybe there's something you can
accomplish by devoting yourself sorry
just to science or just art or just to
something apolitical where the outcomes
are of such magnitude that you really
feel it's worth doing I can imagine that
- and what what if I was in a position
where I owned a piece of land and I
could take the time and build a house on
it maybe that only takes one year or
something so it's not that big a deal
but that would be in my own private
self-interest it's not political okay
maybe I should take all my time and
energy and build this house you know I
can imagine that that kind of temptation
and even you know I volunteered to join
the army Canada to go fight against Isis
um
this is nothing to do with veganism I
mean is it political or apolitical you
know it's kind of both you know there's
a very dubious you know very dubious
proposition no illusions that this is
this is not charity you know try the
army you know it's not charity it's not
research it's not political activism but
for a few years
yeah I guess I'm sorry another example
of becoming a police officer if that
takes all your time and energy to become
police elves but you feel you can have a
positive outcome so yeah you're I think
we're we're tempted by the outcomes okay
so I am gonna rudely cut off co-ceos and
Somerset yeah okay like something popped
good again here it was it's about what
you saw in Buddhism when you when you
decided to pursue a career path like
that yeah and it also relates to another
point like I want to ask you what is the
difference what was different between
Buddhism and other religions especially
as long Chris champion and him and here
and Judaism that really made you like
interested in and and willing to to be
able to stay at that facing of love life
like there right do they have a better
like history when it comes to conversion
to the violence to other aspects right
of organized religion that we see like
sure the short answer is yes all that is
true about Buddhism it does have those
advantages also but I mean the the core
of Buddhist philosophy and religion is
dukkha a Nietzsche an admin so point one
is life is suffering is the common
English translation I prefer to say to
live is to suffer okay
so as an article of faith or as
something a religion is sitting down
it's a dictum this is very fundamentally
different from honor and obey or the the
ten commandments of Moses or the basis
of Judaism let me finish the list so
point one to live is to suffer oh this
is my own rewording the original penalty
actually just says all this is suffering
and all this refers to existence
basically right point to all is
impermanent you know all things are
composed all things are composite all
things are constantly decomposing the
universe is impermanent everything is
impermanent right and there is a little
bit of an undercurrent there of
everything is meaningless that's not the
primary meaning it's often glossed as
everything is empty but the writ is just
always impermanent yeah and then 0.3
there is no soul
so you know your question was how is put
ISM fundamentally different from all the
religions this already gives you a very
powerful sense yes what is it really is
different from all other religions and
it's not just different from
Christianity Judaism Islam it's very
different from the Confucian religion in
China it's very different from Taoism
this is a big profound it's very
different from Hindu it
within India in terms of the the
philosophy this is this is fundamentally
something very different yeah do you
want us more about that I mean I can
answer okay yeah like like well what is
what is the motivating factor that got
you interested in Buddhism and got you
to ditch the other like right that's you
were pursuing at the time with what was
available really so what attracted to
you
well a lot of the motivation was
negative a lot of it was discussed with
European civilization Canadian
civilization dissatisfaction with the
culture was born into so that that's
really the the bedrock was a negative
motivation of wanting to reject you know
the culture I was born into in Canada
which if you guys watch the channel you
know there are different aspects of that
but including genocide including the
history of the British Empire genocide
and slavery
including all the lies that filled my
culture was was built on um you know
lies from the left wing lies from the
right wing lies lies of the British
Empire and I think that's something
that's part of my personality
perspective my Muslim viewers because
over these I used to have some more
exporters on patreon
well I think that's something they can
they can relate to Muslims and Muslims
of really feeling this sense of a burden
there and then you know Buddhism
presented to me a religion that in some
ways resembles nihilism or is compatible
with nothing but some of you might say
but that also had the tantalizing
possibility of humanitarian work making
a positive difference through charity
which I always wanted being a part of a
community and an ethically defined
community which I always wanted is still
here in Venus
I want I'm looking for and aesthetically
I'm not saying ethically aesthetically
this self-disciplined sober militaristic
macho quality which I always had in me
and was never satisfied by the the
culture I was a part of you know I grew
up around a bunch of wimps you know you
know everybody was too soft for me and
nobody was was taking their own
responsibilities seriously you know grew
up around a lot of people who played
video games and did drugs and you know
lived and said this is stole true with
the Western world and their live lives I
felt or meaningless so you know no how
do I react to that one I did read you
know Socrates Socrates as exists in
Plato and Xenophon and you know these
other officers I did read those kinds of
Western philosophers today the religion
of Socrates is dead today stoicism and
cynicism from ancient Athens are dead
nobody is preaching those virtues
nobody's practicing those words that
wasn't a practical reality for me right
I'm not gonna become a an ancient
Athenian philosopher but many of those
same qualities including the the
machismo frankly you know is is there
you know you look at various examples of
that in in Athens um
Buddhism is an ancient philosophy from
about the same period of time 2,500
years ago with those to me what I call
Bronze Age values and it's still here
now you can join you can sign up and you
can get involved with poverty and
post-war disaster in Cambodia and Laos I
was even interested in South Korea that
way
South Korea is more affluent but it's
also a post-war disaster they also have
this kind of this university so again
the humanitarian work the political
reality the economic reality and I mean
again so I'm not here misrepresenting
Buddhist philosophy I'm just answering
the question of what aspects of Buddhist
philosophy appealed to me
Anita anatman Sunita in in Pali
Suniya emptiness and then I mean growing
out of that philosophy you know the
social aspects of yeah yeah yeah that's
so that's that's that presents itself as
a complete package that's that's very
appealing pop yeah why I asked this
question is because like during my
limited researching and reading into
history look especially as long like I
thought that okay like all religions are
the same like they're basically yeah
just different different like exterior
maybe exterior coming up basically
they're the same they're the same
dynamics playing here and there and I
really wanted to know if there's
something like trinsic ly different with
Buddhism and and the culture like a nice
tea like historically does it weigh but
after you in this conversation because
we did talk about this yesterday also a
very different context but would you
after these due date would you agree
that yes there's something fundamentally
you know different about what is them
it's not the same as Islam you know what
you haven't get a very fundamental way
no is this reasonable to say no I don't
think if it's enough like just based on
our discussion yesterday
I still haven't researched sure sure
sure yeah I'm interested in this in this
public because I was really searching
for something that is different like yes
like something to tell me okay like
there is another way like right
especially the history like right itself
differently especially with religion and
and its influence on peoples and
societies and installation with power
and the political systems right but I
mean you know historically Buddhism did
have slavery to give an example I'm
gonna say it's not I'm not saying
everything is
is going to say for us a burger zone
he's long also it kicks it up no God
I'll Circle it Devon flavor Christianity
does the whole is there slavery you know
um you know they do have things in
common and including the involvement of
the religion in in slavery and the slave
trading in various ways and benefiting
from from slavery be part of a slave
Society so my point here is not that
Buddhism is is morally pure but you're
asking is it different and I would
emphasize absolutely fundamentally yes
now what is the future of Saudi Arabia
this is similar to a question he asked
me answer this is not the same question
with someone if you were to ask would
Saudi Arabia be fundamentally better if
in the future
sixty percent of its population became
Buddhist I answer yes and I even attach
this yes even if they became the worst
form of mainstream Buddhism the most
corrupt form which I would say is
Tibetan Buddhism it's a terrible form of
the Buddhist religion but that's still
much much better than the form of Islam
that exists in Saudi Arabia and yes if
sixty percent of people in Saudi Arabia
became Japanese Buddhists she's a
terrible form of Buddhism it's deeply
corrupt and so on that would be better
and if they became Sri Lankan Orthodox
tera vaada but as so that tradition no
sure from my perspective that would be
better so that's a less corrupt version
but but you know my points when you're
making this kind of comparison no I have
no I have no hesitation in talking about
better or worse now if you asked would
it be even better if the majority of
people in Saudi Arabia instead started
believing in Athenian democracy they
became skeptical secular intellectuals
who believe it's like well okay now you
know all of these things are very
unlikely to happen but no it's it's not
saying that it's ideal but sure as a
real robot
and yeah I think I think almost everyone
who studies Buddhism does get kind of
thrilled by the hope of the possibility
that you could have a more a more
Buddhist society whether it's in England
or Canada or California or even within
Asia that Buddhism could make a comeback
but the reality is since world war ii
buddhism has failed and collapsed and
has continued to fail and collapse it's
gotten smaller and smaller and weaker
and luckier
yeah and I just note today in 2018
Buddhism is a is a much less powerful
much less influential philosophy than
communism
so we regard communism as a failure but
it's an incredibly powerful ideology
compared to Buddhism sorry China is
still communist Cuba is still communist
you know etc etc and you know so you can
make a list Vietnam North Korea
you know communism actually still is
very influential in the lives of
millions of people on a huge scale to a
huge extent with huge consequences and
Buddhism is incredibly weak even in Sri
Lanka weakening so I okay I do have old
videos on the channel talking about that
um you know the hope was so this is
similar we talked about a little bit the
the politics of the Arab world after
World War Two in the decolonizing period
where there was a brief period of
optimism and then everything kind of
descended into dictatorship and things
seemed to get hopeless um likewise in
the post-world War two period there was
a period of optimism in the Buddhist
countries that Buddhism was going to
take on a new direction politically
socially and the religion be regenerated
and revived and and that that hopi
daughterly failed minutes ended in
failure
everywhere I'm generalizing but I think
it's actually a fair generalization you
know what are the factors involved well
one
I could talk with us for hours but I
mean outstanding features people didn't
make the difficult decisions about
reconciling faith with science now the
Catholic Church also had difficulty that
will evolution so you mentioned the
debate about evolution you know this
happened within the Catholic Church over
a 100-year period or something
approximately you know went very
gradually eventually the Pope made a
statement that you know the church
should stop opposing evolution that
evolution is more than just a theory
they eventually did settle down on this
but for a long time the Catholic Church
opposed that for for a period they
opposed the idea that the the earth
rolls around the Sun right the Sun with
her forces so this has been an issue
within the Catholic religion it's it's
still an issue in Islam in a subtle but
pervasive way it's a huge issue with
with Buddhism what is the role of
science in relation to religion what's
but you know there are other examples
with modernity in religion the status of
women women in religion women's equality
or even even if it's not equality
women's status women having decent
status you know even if not equal can
they at least be 90 percent equal or
something you know in this religion huge
huge challenge for Buddhism and yeah I
mean but there's a series of challenges
here in terms of the confrontation of
tradition with modernity this was the
first period in Buddhism when the Bible
of Buddhism was directly available to
the followers of the religion they just
in the Koran is available to all Muslims
and basically has been since the life of
the Prophet basically I mean you could
say there's a little bit of a lag in
terms of publishing and so on but
Buddhism has not been like that Buddhism
has relied on a great deal of faith on
on monks as the interpreters and
custodians of tradition and yeah that
was a huge challenge so in the same way
that when the printing press in Europe
first made the Bible
available to more Christians this
challenge for for Buddhist in dealing
with their own tradition and the
challenges of modernity there was a lot
going on in that period of time and it
failed there was a lot of potential -
there was a lot of hope and in Buddhism
Buddhism failed I think I should look
into it more especially history of East
Asia the culture well and look you know
when talking about the weakness of
Buddhism today in sri lanka in laos i'll
just use the two examples in both sri
lanka and laos everyone is very afraid
of the growing presence of christianity
and the growing presence of islam this
is basically true in all the Buddhist
going to the Zylstra in south korea
seoul strand Myanmar so these are
Buddhist countries that in the past for
majority Buddhist and the percentage of
people who are Christian keeps growing
the percentage people who are Muslim
keeps growing growing and they're really
afraid
but as terrorism gonna die and disappear
the opposite is not true anywhere in the
world is there anywhere where you have a
majority Muslim country where Buddhism
is growing and growing and the Muslims
say wow so many people are converting to
Buddhism we have to really be worried
about losing the Muslim tradition no no
y-you know but and you know challenges
of why why do well I heard there were a
couple examples like that around you
know this this shows the depth of the
failure you know and you know again
judged by the same standards as
communism in communism generally you can
say as a failure but there were some big
exceptions China is a really big
exception it's enormous right it failed
in Russia Russia seems to be communist
but you know but you know so you should
expect even with a failure you should
expect some some exceptions and we don't
we don't have that in us so yeah and
with that having been said we talked
about the importance of outcomes for me
there still is that temptation could I
do more good in the world
but becoming a Buddhist preacher a
leader of Buddhist opinion even a
Buddhist monk or going back to academia
get a PhD in Buddhism like if I can make
more of a positive difference in the
world by working within that philosophy
and by let's say performing funeral
rituals which are pretty harmless
perform you know giving a giving a nice
speech and a ceremony and you know read
out an ancient text and pally and stand
there and interpret talk about the
philosophy that all is impermanent and
there is no soul hey guys we're doing a
funeral ceremony and guess what I'm not
gonna reinsure reassure you that this
guy's immortal soul is living in Canada
no I'm sorry who's living in heaven
forever and ever you know I'm here to
reassure you the opposite that he never
had a soul and his body is now gonna
decompose because all all things are
impermanent and decomposed and so on um
sure the temptation is there because of
the possibility of having those those
positive outcomes and this the first
time I mentioned this on on camera but
yeah sorry this is a brief brief
anecdote but I think it is an
interesting one um I have I have lucid
dreams most of time so most of the time
when I dream I'm aware that I'm dreaming
and I can control the dream but a couple
of weeks ago I had not been thinking
about this at all
my girlfriend I were talking a lot about
plans for the future plans would add the
baking plans went to a number of things
but I think probably were talking about
Cree in a Jif way whether or not I
should start studying curry again my
options were studying curry is a
language how much time I should spend on
Chinese how much time I should spend on
French or maybe going back to saying
create we're talking about those kinds
of issues for the future a lot but we
were not talking and thinking about
Buddhism at all I mean not for months it
really hadn't been a topic and I had
very powerful dreams two nights in a row
and the dreams the dream was really
about you know the dream was really
stating to me as its thesis look right
now was the time for you to go back and
commit to paly to this ancient language
of Buddhism now is the time for you to
commit to Buddhist studies you know now
you've got to do this and you're gonna
take you know you can become a major
figure in this field academically and
you can be involved in you know
political community leadership but you
could you could take on this path and
this can really be a way for you know
you could pause the difference in the
world
you know in a scholarly sense well
against the Daughters of Charity
research politics being a public
intellectual you know this this is
really the way to do it and the most
surprising thing about the dream like if
I haven't been talking to one person on
the phone about it when I was away it
wouldn't be that surprising but I mean I
woke up and I said to Melissa I was not
home you know I can't believe I just had
this dream because I haven't been
considering this option at all this has
not been on my mind you know even the
possibility of going back to Palli and I
remember in the dream also I in effect
said that myself it was like a you know
Socratic dialogue but guess what when
you're asleep you're only talking to
yourself you know but some in the dream
I pointed out to myself when you went
back and studied lotion again the loud
language you remembered so much you
still at the handwriting you still the
vocabulary remember this stuff when you
go back and when you went back and say
French again which I've just been doing
at that time
you know I hadn't studied or thought of
a French verb for so many years you were
able to start relearning French again
you studied Polly so much more intensely
in more depth than with more passion you
worked so hard on that language if you
go back to it now with your current
level of preparation experience in
languages languages and philosophy
languages and philosophy and politics
you are going to really be able to place
a trail in this field of study and then
not just in the field of study but then
this is gonna lead to humanitarian work
and making a difference so that
temptation is there that that's the and
you know as I say two nights in a row
had I had dreams about this and you know
to me it was it was a totally alien
thought I can't I can't even say this
was a repressed thought but so hard in
fact when I was okay that's great so
melissa is I think falling asleep oh
he's good too
you look great babe don't worry there's
no us on the coach all right two hours
and 21 minutes guys I hope you enjoyed
this conversation um I'm really pleased
say mom and Socrates has been forming
the channel for three years I hope I
still know you five years from now we
just talked about you know what are the
possibilities in the next five years one
of the reasons I'm on the Internet is to
recruit talent and talent comes in all
kinds of shapes and Sciences sometimes
it's somebody who's working in
biochemistry sometimes it's somebody
who's an artist like the guy who was
offering to illustrate my children's
textbook but I didn't come here on on
YouTube I don't know to hang out with a
bunch of idiots or just to make fun of
how stupid the other YouTube channels
are it's really you might think that's
why I'm here you might think I'm here
for criticism today it's a criticism but
no I'm ultimately out here recruiting
new talent because I care passionately
about the future the vegan movement and
I hope you do too
if you're watching this video and you're
trying to do something positive for
veganism in the next five years send me
an email hit me up